---

layout: page 
title: Approximate Graph Mining with Label Costs
topic: Data Mining

---


Authors: Anchuri et al.
Year: 2013

[paper](https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/2487575.2487602)


Most motif mining papers try to find patterns (motifs) that are isomorphic to a large number of subgraphs in a dataset of graphs.
Here, the authors ateempt to relax the constraint in the setting where nodes have a 'label' and allow motifs to match subgraphs with some discrepancy in the node labels. 

Graphs are associated with a cost matrix $C[l_i][l_j]$ gives the cost of matching node label $l_i$ to $l_j$ where each graph has a vector of node labels $L$.
A motif is represented as a 'pattern graph' which is isomorphic to some subgraphs of the whole dataset such that some function $\phi$ is an injective mapping from the pattern graph nodes $G_P$ to some subgraph of the data $V_S$.
This means that instances of $G_P$ will be isomorphic to it, but to allow for some flexibility, an isomorpic mapping can have some cost $C(\phi) = \sum_{u \in V_P} C[L(u)][L(\phi(u))]$, or the sum of label substitution costs.
The *support* of a pattern is a function of the number of occurrences of the pattern in the data which can be defined in different ways.
The *representative set* of a node is the set of nodes that map to it.
The overall approach is then to generate possible pattern graphs and compute its support, and yield the representative set of all the patterns with large support.
Of course enumerating all possible patterns grows exponentially with the size of the pattern.
Intead, patterns are generated by randomly adding edges to an initial seed node in a depth-first manner.
The edges are extended as long as the pattern has sufficient support and abandoned otherwise.
Evaluation consists mostly of showing that the algorithm is able to return patterns with a given support level within some time limit.
Pattern size appears to be sufficiently large.



