---
layout: post
title: Exercise Solutions to Christian Theology by Alister E. McGrath
date: 2024-04-26
---

## Part 1 Chapter 1: The Patristic Period C.100–C.700

1. *What was the main issue debated during the Arian controversy? Why did Arius's opponents regard this as being of such importance?*

 Arius (c.250-c.336) argued that Christ was not fully God. Instead He was an exalted creature among other creatures on Earth. This position was eventually deemed heretical. Arius' main opponent, Athanassius rejected this notion on the basis of "soteriology" (the study of salvation). A creature cannot bring salvation to other creatures. Since Christ brought salvation to the creation he must be fully God. Arianism was deemed heretical.

2. *Why was the introduction of fixed creeds widely regarded as a welcome development by many within the churches?*

 A creed (from the latin *credo*, I believe) is a formal statement of faith. Creeds in the Christian faith are used to identify the basic set of beliefs common to all Christians.

3. *Why was it important to reach agreement on the canon of Scripture? What practical difference would this have made to theological debate at the time?*

 Christian theology from the outset was grounded in Scripture. To achieve a firm grounding it was necessary to have agreement on which texts should make up the Scripture. 

4. *The English historian Thomas Carlyle once suggested that history was basically the biography of great individuals. On the basis of your reading of this chapter, who do you think was the most significant person in relation to the shaping of Christian theology over this period?*

 Augustine of Hippo established theology as a systematic practice which went beyond simply defending Christianity from from its critics.

5. *Why was there relatively little interest in the doctrine of the church in this early period? And why do you think the Donatist controversy broke out in the western, rather than the eastern, church?*

 In the early period, the Church was more concerned with issues of mere survival rather than developing doctrine. The Donatists were a group of early Christians who believed that membership in the Church should be reserved only for the purest and those who deviated from the doctrine should be excluded. Augustine disagreed with this view and argued that the Church is a mixed body of sinners and saints united under the person of Jesus Christ. The issue was heightened in response to persecution of Christians whereby Donatists pushed for the exclusion of those who gave up their scripture ("traditores" coming from the Latin  "those who handed over [their Scriptures]"). 




