---
layout: post
title: On the compact, and why we should sign.
date: 2025-10-19
comments: True
---

This is a quick note summarizing my thoughts on the [proposed compact](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1FVs7yHK1iXIs-wTOQQRTDNERnlSnUe9v/view) between
the US government and universities.

For a point by point response to the contents of the compact, I recommend [this Heterodox STEM article](https://heterodoxatusc.substack.com/cp/175738519).
Prof. Krylov's article concludes that though there are some points that require further
discussion, broadly speaking the compact, if implemented,
would indeed help achieve its stated aim of academic excellence.
This leaves the criticisms of the compact _in itsef_, which I briefly address
here.


---

A cursory mediation on the nature of the state-university relationship reveals that a compact between universities and the state has in fact always existed, and it reads as follows:


The American public has a desire to benefit from and sees value in the discovery of True
knowledge and access to high quality education, i.e. academic excellence.
This desire is implemented democratically in the form of payment from the
people to the universities by means of taxation.
In return for this funding, universities are trusted to provide the desired
value to the citizens.
In other words, universities are engaged in a voluntary, (ideally) value-generating, service to taxpayers as represented by the government.


I must pause here to note that the voluntary and transactional nature of this relationship
invalidates any talk of suppression of freedom of speech as irrelevant.
This funding is not owed to the universities, nor does it constitute the
protection of any fundamental rights.
As stated in the compact, universities remain free to act as they wish, but by
the same token the people are free to whithold further funding if they believe
their
interests are no longer being served.

And now the problem.
The last ten years have made it abundantly clear that this trust has been broken, and that there are serious doubts about the value we claim to provide.
Given this reality, the public now faces a difficult choice: cease university funding altogether, or find a
better solution than the implicit compact.
We should be glad to find that the pubilc has chosen the latter and see it as a goodwill attempt at mending our relationship with the public, not an attack on academia.
The existence of the compact is a signal that the public shares our belief that "academic excellence" is worth pursuing, otherwise funding would simply be rescinded without this much fuss.
It follows that in the name of this belief,  and in the name of humility for the taxpayer whom we serve, we must be prepared to clearly state the means by which we intend to provide academic excellence.
To put it more bluntly, this is an opportunity to dispel the public's (warranted) suspicions of our
weak character and sense of entitlement.


I grant that the university would be right to engage in further discussion with the administration to clarify some of the ambiguities, legality, and negotiate on certain points (as mentioned in the Heterodox STEM article).
But to reject a compact outright would be the self-inflicted final nail in the university's coffin.
It will read as a loud and open declaration that on principle, we academics lack principles.


