---
layout: post
title: Why are you not vaccinated? 
date: 2021-11-14
comments: True
---

I offer here a possible answer to the question, "why are you not vaccinated?".
Of course, this is a loaded question; it being asked presupposes that 'being unvaccinated' is a state that requires justification.
Since *to be unvaccinated* is merely to be, granting validity to such a question essentially puts one's very existence on trial.
Putting aside the fact that the question is stillborn, in these times the question is still better than no question.
The question is nonetheless an invitation to dialogue, and a suspension of the practice of a priori labeling and demonization (anti-vax, anti-science, or even [racist & mysogynist](https://www.lifesitenews.com/news/trudeau-calls-unvaccinated-canadians-racists-misogynists-in-unhinged-interview/)). 
My aim with this piece precisely to make sure that when such a dialogue is opened, it is done so in the most productive way possible.
By productive, I do not mean that it should result in somone being swayed one way or another, but rather to at least establish a reasonable logical thread behind what is now a very unpopular position.
Although unpopular, I hope that by the end of this piece the reader will at least see that the opinion is grounded in sound principles.


IDEA:

- Start with principle of not treating people as means, but rather as ends. Then show that this is actually the foundation for what makes us human. When we treat people as means and not ends, we actually cease to consider them human. What are we trying to save if we have rendered ourselves inhuman for the sake of humanity?


1. *We have witnessed an escalating sequence of dehumanizing policies.*

Mask mandates 

I say these policies are dehumanizing by appealing to the famous 'categorical imperative'.
That is, these policies at their core treat people as means rather than ends unto themselves.
What happens when people are treated as means is essentialy that their humanity is denied.
At the root of the principle of treating people as ends is the assertion that the individual is of infinite value.
One can derive this principle from religious sources (man is created in the image of god, or carries the stamp of the divine), or through secular arguments which rely on identifying humas as those creatures which posess an autonomous will.
This notion is at the heart of our legal and human rights systems.


Why do we say that we have righst? 
Probably because we are all equal in some sense.
Of course we are all biological beings, but we certainly do not accept that we have the same set of rights as fish.
Kant would argue that we are equal in the sense that we have a kernel of freedom, or autonomy.
That is, the faculty which generates desires and identifies ends for our actions, which can be influenced but cannot be causally constrained.
We can feel an impulse to steal, or we can feel a desire to obey a certain law not to steal, but because we are never causally obliged to follow that law in the same way a rock follows the law of gravity or an animal will always eat when he is hungry.
Of course we can draw on sophisticated theories of evolution or neuroscience to argue that we are still somehow pre-determined to the choices, but ultimately our scociety is at least built on the notion that we treat and hold others responsible to their actions as though they were autonomous agents.
A murder is not excused or ceases to be an evil act because it can be associated with a difficult childhood or even genetic predispoitions.
In any case, autonomy can be argued to be at the basis of human dignity 
In fact, without autonomy it would be very difficult to even conceptualize moral good or evil.


Why does autonomy lead to dignity?





2.  *To the degree which these policies are de-humanising they are also self-defeating.*

Whether their use is warranted, many of the policies implemented as a response to COVID share the property that they strip those subjected to them of the very freedoms that make them human.
Mask mandates have turned common spaces into seas of faceless 

3. The latest escalation on this sequence came with vaccines which are being distributed against a background of positive and negative coercion.  

- sacrifice
- hospitalizations. hospitals are meant to act as a support for humanity, not as an institution that dictates what is considered human.
- discriminates against human nature

4. Vaccination status is meticulously tracked at an individual level. 
5. Refusal


====

1. *In so far as we have rights, we are human.* Here is my attempt at an intuitive deriviation of what greater minds have already established (Kant). An unobjectionable truth about the human experience is  that we are limited. Because we are limited, by definition there will always exist more than we can apprehend. From this, it follows that if we are all limited beings, we will never have the knowledge to decree what someone else ought to do, lest it be discovered that in the great unknown lies a perfect proof to the contrary. We easily recognize that in the lottery all tickets are equal since there the unknown shows her face quite plainly. Perhaps now we arrived at a situation of equality, but not quite at rights. As humans, we have the remarkable ability to  

